---
layout: member
title: N.T.Devika
position: student
designation: Institute Post Doctoral Fellow, Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat & Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences
nickname: 
handle: devika
email: ntdevika@gmail.com
interests: Systems Biology
image: /assets/images/people/Devika-NT.jpg
github: 
twitter: 
alum: false
---

I currently look into the metabolism of infant gut microbe using constraint-based genome-scale model leading to its importance in human health and disease and in a variety of industrial applications.
My Phd work at Anna University focused on endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), an enzyme which promote release of nitric acid in endothelium. Employing computational approaches, my doctoral dissertation brings in detail the mechanochemical signal transduction pathway, structural cues in phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events and the protein interaction underlying the signalling events. 

<em><strong>Papers</strong></em> 
1. Devika NT, Amresh P, Hassan MI, Ali BM 2014, ‘Molecular modelling and simulation of
human eNOS reductase domain, an enzyme involved in release of vascular Nitric Oxide’,
Journal of Molecular Model. vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 2470.
2. Devika, NT & Jaffar Ali BM 2013, ‘Analysing calcium dependent and independent
regulation of eNOS in endothelium triggered by extracellular signalling events’, Molecular
bioSystems, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 2653-64.
3. Dhanushya, R, Devika, NT & Jaffar Ali BM 2009, ‘In silico reaction kinetic model of shear
stress induced eNOS activation in arterial endothelium’, The World Congress on Nature and
Biologically Inspired Computing, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, ISBN: 978-1-4244-5053-4,
pp. 1737-1742.
